---
layout: page
title: CF 1114
parent: Contest (2)
math: true
---

## D

*Tags: DP*

There are $n$ cells labelled $1$ to $n$ in a row. Initially cell $i$
has color $a_i$.

First choose an arbitrary cell, call it starting cell. Then, you can
perform operations:

In one operation, you can select a contiguous section
of cells, **including the starting cell**, where each cell has **same color**, and change its color to any
other color.

Find the minimum number of operations to make colors of all cells same.

Constraints:
- $1 \le n \le 5000$
- $1 \le a_i \le 5000$

**Solution**

Our initial segment is $[k, k]$ (if $k$ is starting cell) and
in each operation we increase the size of max contiguous section having same color
(and containing the starting cell).

If current range is $[l, r]$, after an operation there are two choices:
- Left expansion: It becomes $[l', r]$ where $l' \lt l$ and color changes to $a_{l'}$
- Right expansion: It becomes $[l, r']$ where $r \lt r'$ and color changes to $a_{r'}$

Let $L(l, r)$ be minimum number of operations to get 
segment $[l, r]$ with color $a_l$ (last expansion towards left).

Define $R(l, r)$ for right expansion similarly.

Then,

$$
L(l, r) = \begin{cases}
0 & \text{if } l = r \\
  \min \begin{cases}
  L(l + 1, r) + k & \text{where } k = 0 \text{ if } a_l = a_{l+1} \text{ else } 1 \\
  R(l + 1, r) + k & \text{where } k = 0 \text{ if } a_l = a_r \text{ else } 1 \\
  \end{cases} & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

The two subcases in second part correspond to whether last expansion was
on left or right side. An operation is skipped is $a_l$ is
the same as color obtained in last expansion.

$R$ is very similar in definition.

Final answer is $\min[L(1, n), R(1, n)]$

***

## E

*Tags: Probability, randomized algorithms*

There is a list (not given to us) $a_1, \ldots, a_n$ which, when sorted
in ascending order, forms an arithmetic progression with positive common
difference (meaning that the elements are distinct).

There are two possible operations:
- Reveal value of $a_i$
- Given integer $x$, check whether there exist an element $y \gt x$.

Overall, we can perform $60$ operations (including both types)

Recover the first element and common difference (positive)
of this arithmetic progression.

Constraints:
- $0 \le a_i \le 10^9$ (this list is not given)
- $2 \le n \le 10^6$

**Solution**

Using the second operation, we can find the largest value by binary search.
It will cost not more than $30$ operations since $30 \gt \lg{10^9}$.

Let first element be $x$ and common difference be $d$.

We have the last element $y = x + (n-1)d$.

For remaining $30$ queries:
- Select a random number $i$ in $[1, n]$. Obtain $a_i$
  with an operation.
- $a_i$ will have form $x + kd$ where $0 \le k \le n - 1$
- Store $y - a_i = (n - 1 - k)d$ in some list $D$.

At the end of this, we will have a list $D$ of size $30$.
Each $D_i$ has form $kd$ where $0 \le k \le n - 1$ and each $k$
is selected uniformly randomly from this range.

For each pair of elements $(k_1 d, k_2 d)$ in $D$, compute $g = \gcd(k_1 d, k_2 d)$.
For each pair it will hold that:
- $g \ge d$ (except when $k_1 = 0$ or $k_2 = 0$, we handle this special case by taking difference)
- $g = d$ when $k_1$ and $k_2$ have different parity because $\gcd(2pd, (2q + 1)d) = d$.

We report $d$ as minimum $g$ over all pairs hoping that we did not get parity of all $k_i$ same.

The probability of getting all $k$ with
same parity, let it be $p$, is given by:

$$
p = \begin{cases}
(\frac{1}{2})^{30} + (\frac{1}{2})^{30} & \text{if } n = 2t \\
(\frac{t}{2t + 1})^{30} + (\frac{t + 1}{2t + 1})^{30} & \text{if } n = 2t + 1
\end{cases}
$$

$p$ comes out, at most, in order of $10^{-5}$ with given constraints on $n$.
Thus, the chance of failing is $1$ in $10^5$ submissions.

***

## F

We have a list of integers $a$ of length $n$.

Process two type of queries:
1. Given $(l, r, x)$ do $a_i \leftarrow a_i \cdot x$ for all $l \le i \le r$
  (in other words, multiply each element in range by $x$)
2. Given $(l, r)$ find $\Phi(a_l \cdot a_{l+1} \cdot \ldots \cdot a_r)$
  where $\Phi$ is Euler's totient function.

Constraints:
- $1 \le n \le 10^5$
- $1 \le a_i, x \le 300$ ($x$ in type 1 query)

**Solution**

Recall Euler's product formula

$$
\Phi(n) = n \cdot \prod\limits_{p \in P}{\left(1 - \frac{1}{p}\right)}
$$

where $P$ is set of distinct prime factors of $n$.

Let $z = \prod\limits_{l \le i \le r}{a_i}$

Let $P_z$ denote set of distinct prime factors of $z$, then $P_z$
is union of sets of prime factors of its factors. We get

$$
P_z = \bigcup\limits_{l \le i \le r}{P_{a_i}}
$$

Thus, for some range $[l, r]$ if we know the product of all elements and
union of their distinct prime factors, we can calculate the answer.

> Notice that $a_i, x$ have very small values. We will have only upto $62$ primes (number of primes not exceeding $300$).
> We can use bitmask for set representation and bitwise OR for set union.

We can use a range (lazy) update segment tree where:
- Each node is a pair $(s, P)$ where $s$ is the product of all elements
  in the corresponding range and $P$ is set of distinct primes.
- Combining two nodes $(s_1, P_1)$ and $(s_2, P_2)$ will simply lead
  to $(s_1 \cdot s_2, P_1 \cup P_2)$.
- Updates can also be of form $(x, Q)$ where $Q$ is set of distinct primes in $x$.
  - If new update $(x_1, Q_1)$ is added, we get $(x \cdot x_1, Q \cup Q_1)$.
  - When update $(x, Q)$ is applied to a node $(s, P)$, we get
    $(s \cdot x^m, P \cup Q)$ where $m$ is range size.

***