---
layout: page
title: CF 1783
parent: Contest
math: true
---

## D

You are given list $a$ of $n$ integers.

You have to perform $n-2$ operations in sequence. The $i$-th operation is one of:
- $a_i \leftarrow a_i - a_{i+1}$ and $a_{i+2} \leftarrow a_{i+2} + a_{i+1}$
- $a_i \leftarrow a_i + a_{i+1}$ and $a_{i+2} \leftarrow a_{i+2} - a_{i+1}$

In other words, for $i = 1$ to $n-2$ (in order), $a_{i+1}$ should be added to one of the neighbors
and subtracted from the other.

Find number of distinct arrays that can be obtained (modulo $10^9 + 7$)

Constraints:
- $1 \le n \le 300$
- $1 \le a_i \le 300$

**Solution**

Let $f(i, x)$ be number of distinct arrays of length $i$
with last element as $x$ after performing operations
$1, 2, \ldots, i-2$.

Let $X$ be the set of possible values of $x$ (which
will be in range $[-M \cdot n, M \cdot n]$ where $M$ is maximum
possible $a_i$)

We can define a base case for $i = 0$ as
- $f(2, a_2) = 1$ since if we perform $0$ operations, we have $[a_1, a_2]$.
- $f(2, x) = 0$ if $x \neq a_2$

Now assume that $f(i, x)$  $\forall$ $x \in X$ is computed and
we want to compute $f(i+1, y)$ $\forall$ $y \in X$ ($f(i+1, y) = 0$ initially)

For some $(i, x)$ we
have $f(i, x)$ distinct arrays of form $[\ldots, z, x]$. In the next operation, such an array can yield:
- $[\ldots, z - x, x, a_{i+1} + x]$
  - Let $u = a_{i+1} + x$. Then we can get $f(i, x)$ arrays with last element $u$
  - Do $f(i+1, u) \leftarrow f(i+1, u) + f(i,x)$
- $[\ldots, z + x, x, a_{i+1} - x]$
  - Let $v = a_{i+1} - x$. Then we can get $f(i, x)$ arrays with last element $v$
  - Do $f(i+1, v) \leftarrow f(i+1, v) + f(i,x)$

We will now show that after above computation, $f(i+1, y)$ will only count distinct arrays.
Notice that only $f(i, a_i - y)$ and $f(i, y - a_i)$ contribute to value of $f(i+1, y)$.

Let $U$ and $V$ be the set of arrays (of length $i$) covered by $f(i, a_i - y)$ and $f(i, y - a_i)$
respectively.

$U \cap V = \phi$ since both sets have different last element in arrays
- Unless $a_i = y \Rightarrow a_i - y = y - a_i$ since in
  that case last elements will be equal implying $U = V$.
  In that case we will add only once.

As part of the operation (to make length $i+1$ and array ending with $y$):
- We will append $y$ to each array in $U$ and $V$.
- For each array in $U$, we will subtract $a_i - y$ from third-last element.
- For each array in $V$, we will add $a_i + y$ to third-last element.

After these operation, we still have $U \cap V = \phi$
since the second last element will differ in $U$ and $V$ (it will be $a_i - y, a_i + y$ respectively).

Time complexity: $O(n^2 M)$ where $M$ is maximum possible $a_i$.

> **Implementation note**:
> Negative indices can be handled by using some offset.
> Example: suppose we want to represent indices
> between $-5$ to $5$ then we can take an array $a$ ($0$-indexed) of length $11$
> and $a_{5 + i}$ can represent element at index $i$. Thus, $a_0, a_{10}$ will
> represent elements at indices $-5, 5$ respectively.

***