---
layout: page
title: CF 1770
parent: Contest
math: true
---

## C

*Tags: Primes, Chinese remainder theorem*

Given integers $a_1,\ldots,a_n$, the problem asks existence of some $x \gt 0$
such that $\gcd(a_i + x, a_j + x) = 1$ for all pairs $i, j$.

But it is important to read it as:
Find $x$ $(x \gt 0)$ such that in final state,
any prime $p$ divides at most one element from $a_1+x,\ldots,a_n+x$.

**Solution**

First of all, if we have some $a_i = a_j$, then it is not possible.

Also for some prime $p \gt \max_{1 \le i \le n}{a_i}$, it can't divide
both elements of some pair $(a_i + x, a_j + x)$ because:
- $a_i \neq a_j \Rightarrow a_i + x \neq a_j + x$ 
- Difference has to be a non-zero multiple of $p$, i.e., $(a_i + x) - (a_j + x) = kp$
  which means $a_i - a_j = kp$ which is not possible since $1 \le a_i, a_j \lt p$

For some prime $p \le \max{a_i}$ (let these be $p_1,\ldots,p_m$)
- Let $r_i = (a_i + x) \bmod p$ for all $i$.
- We want to find value of $x$ such that there is most one $r_i = 0$
- Suppose we have list of $n$ values $[a_1 \bmod p, \ldots, a_n \bmod p]$ initially.
  - In each step we add $1$ to each (modulo $p$) and check number of elements equal to $0$.
  - If there is at most one such element, we stop as we have obtained such $x$ (number of times we added $1$).
  - If after $p$ times this process doesn't work, it means that we
    have at least two occurrences of each of $0, 1, \ldots, p-1$ in initial state.
- If we have found some $x = t$, $x = t + kp$ also works.
- We get a condition on overall $x$ as $x \pmod p = t$

> Note that for some prime $p \gt \lfloor \frac{n}{2} \rfloor$, we will
> always find some $x$ as we can never have all occurrences of each of $0$ to $p-1$
> at least twice (since $2p \gt n$)

For all primes in previous case, we will get conditions:
- $x \bmod p_1 = t_1$
- $x \bmod p_2 = t_2$
- $\cdots$
- $x \bmod p_m = t_2$

Chinese remainder theorem guarantees an existence of an $x$ satisfying
set of conditions above.

## D

*Tags: Graphs, Combinatorics*

This problem can be reduced to:

Given two integer arrays $a_1,\ldots,a_n$
and $b_1,\ldots,b_n$ with $1 \le a_i, b_i \le n$, find number
of ways to generate a permutation of $1,\ldots,n$ when you have
a choice at each index to either take $a_i$ or $b_i$.

**Solution**

Here the idea is that since $(a_i, b_i)$ are tied together, we
can take only one. Suppose we have a graph of nodes $1$ to $n$
and we have edges $(a_i, b_i)$, then for each edge we can choose
only single endpoint

We have these observations:
- There are $n$ edges and $n$ vertices. The graph may not be connected.
- For each connected component of $k$ vertices, we must have exactly $k$ edges
  since we can select 1 vertex per edge and we need to select all vertices
  (exactly condition is there because total number of edges equals total number of vertices)
- There can be either 1 double edge or 1 self loop or 1 simple cycle.
  - Nodes connected (to vertices which are part of this) will be trees (or tree roots).

Suppose we direct the edges such that if edge $(u, v)$ directed from $u$ to $v$
then $u$ is selected. For each vertex there should be exactly 1 outgoing edge,
as we need to select each of $1, \ldots, n$ and we have $n$ edges.

- In case of self loop $(u, u)$, we will already have $u$ selected
  so there can only be incoming edges to $u$. The graph can be
  oriented in a single way.
  - But we will still count this as 2 ways (selecting $a_i$ or $b_i$, both result into same thing since $a_i = b_i$)
- In case of double edge $(a_i, b_i)$ and $(a_j, b_j)$ then we can orient those
  into two ways. Rest of the edges will have to be incoming, forcing direction of rest of the edges.
  - This will count as two ways.
- In case of simple cycle, we have to orient edges in a cyclical way (because that's the only way each will have exactly 1 outgoing edge).
  This can be done in two ways (clockwise and counter-clockwise). Rest of the edges will have forced direction, incoming to this cycle.
  - This will count as two ways.

Thus number of ways is $2^C$ where $C$ is number of connecteed components (each have nodes equal to number of edges).

> In the problem, we need to do special handling of cases where self loop is there. We have $n$ choices, rather than $2$, in the context of problem.

***