---
layout: page
title: CF 1768
parent: Contest
math: true
---

## C

You are given list $a$ of $n$ integers.

Find two permutations $p, q$ such that $a_i = \max(p_i, q_i)$ for all $i \in [1, n]$.

Constraints:
- $1 \le n \le 10^5$
- $1 \le a_i \le n$
- $p, q$ are permutations of $1$ to $n$

**Solution**

For some $x$, let $S_x$ be the multiset containing all $a_i \le x$.

If $\vert S_x \vert \gt x$ for some $x$, there is no solution because maximum
size of the multiset containing all $p_i, q_i$ for all $a_i \le x$
is $2x$ as all values are in $[1, x]$ and no value occurs more than twice
(since $p, q$ are permutations).

Let us analyse $x$ from $1$ to $n$:
- If there are no occurences of $x$ in $a$, then we can
  use $x$ with some greater number.
- If there is a single occurence of $x$, say $x = a_i$ then
  we can set $p_i = q_i = x$
- If there are two occurences of $x$, say $x = a_i = a_j$, then
  we will need two numbers less than $x$.
  - Since it holds that $\vert S_x \vert \le x$, we have $\vert S_{x-1} \vert \le x - 2$
    this means there exists some $z$ in $[1, x-1]$ that doesn't occur in $a$.
    We can use two instances of $z$ (say $p_i = x, q_i = z$ and $p_j = z, q_j = x$)
  - We can show that such operation doesn't affect greater values of $x$.
    Suppose we replace an $x$ in $S_x$ (there will be two instances) with a $z$.
    Then, this doesn't change size of any of $\vert S_y \vert$ where $y \gt x$
    and we make sure that $z$ is not used again.

***

## D

You are given a permutation $p$ of $1$ to $n$.
In one operation, you can choose $i, j \in [1, n]$ and
swap $p_i, p_j$.

Find minimum number of operations such that $p$ has exactly
one inversion.

Constraints:
- $1 \le n \le 10^5$

**Solution**

> See: sorting a permutation with swaps

Notice that there can be a single inversion, if going backwards from
a sorted permutation, when we swap two adjacent elements.

We can view the permutation as an iterated function. Then
we will have some independent cycles.
In case of sorting, we need to get $n$ independent cycles.
Each swap operation changes the number of cycles by $1$.

Let $K$ be the minimum number of operations required to sort $p$.

Now suppose we wrap $i, i+1$ under new names $i+1, i$ (and in final state we will unwrap).
Then, the number of cycles increases by one if these were initially in
the same cycle and decreases by one if they were initially in different cycles.

If there exists some $i$ where number of cycles increases by one,
we report answer $K-1$.

Otherwise, the answer is $K+1$.

***

## E

Suppose you have a permutation $P$ of length $3n$ containing $1$ to $3n$

You can do two types of operations:
- Sort first $2n$ elements
- Sort last $2n$ elements

Let $f(P)$ be the number of operations to sort permutation $P$

Find sum of $f(P)$ over all $(3n)!$ permutations.

Constraints:
- $1 \le n \le 10^6$

**Solution**

We will not require more than 3 operations to sort any permutation with
given operations (op. 1, op. 2, then op. 1 again will sort any permutation)

Now we analyze each set of permutations based on operations required.
Set $S_i$ will require (minimum) $i$ operations to sort.

$S_0$ - the set containing only the sorted permutation.
Thus, $\vert S_0 \vert = 1$.

$S_1$: we need two sets of permutations:
- $X$ where $P_{1,n} = [1, \ldots, n]$ and rest of elements in any order.
- $Y$ where $P_{2n+1,3n} = [2n + 1, \ldots, 3n]$ and rest of elements in any order.

We get $S_1 = (X \cup Y) - S_0$ (as we exclude the sorted permutation).

$\Rightarrow \vert S_1 \vert = \vert X \vert + \vert Y \vert - \vert X \cap Y \vert - 1$

- $\vert X \vert = \vert Y \vert = (2n)!$
  - We fix $n$ elements and rest can be permuted
- $\vert X \cap Y \vert = n!$
  - Both $P_{1,n}$ and $P_{2n+1,3n}$ are fixed

We get:

$$
\vert S_1 \vert = 2 \cdot (2n)! - (n!) - 1
$$

$S_2$: we need two sets of permutations:
- $U$ where all of $[1, \ldots, n]$ are contained in $P_{1, 2n}$
- $V$ where all of $[2n+1, \ldots, 3n]$ are contained in $P_{2n+1, 3n}$

We get $S_2 = (U \cup V) - S_1 - S_0$ (since all permutations in both sets $S_0$ and $S_1$ satisfy the above conditions)

$\Rightarrow \vert S_2 \vert = \vert U \vert + \vert V \vert - \vert U \cap V \vert - \vert S_1 \vert - 1$

- $\vert U \vert = \vert V \vert = \binom{2n}{n} \cdot (n!) \cdot (2n)!$
  - We choose $n$ places out of $1$ to $2n$ for $[1, \ldots, n]$ and permute them and place rest ($2n$) of the elements freely
    and permute them.
- $\vert U \cap V \vert$ is a bit tricky.
  - We know that $P_{1, n}$ (first part) will contain elements from $[1, \ldots, n]$ or $[n+1, \ldots, 2n]$.
  - Similarly, $P_{2n + 1, 3n}$ (third part) will contain elements from $[2n+1, \ldots, 3n]$ or $[n+1, \ldots, 2n]$.
  - Suppose we fix $k$ places in $P_{n+1,2n}$ (the middle part)
    for some fixed $k$ elements from $[1, \ldots, n]$. Number of ways of doing so is $\binom{n}{k} \cdot \binom{n}{k}$.
  - Now, we have fixed set of $n-k$ elements in first part from $[1, \ldots, n]$. The rest $k$
    elements will be from $[n+1, \ldots, 2n]$. Let's fix $k$ of them. Number of ways of choosing such elements is $\binom{n}{k}$.
  - Finally, we have fixed $n$ elements in first part, $k$ elements in second part
    and rest $2n - k$ elements can be placed arbitrarily (will still satisfy the conditions). Number of ways to
    permute is $n! \cdot k! \cdot (2n - k)!$
  - Overall, we get $\binom{n}{k} \cdot \binom{n}{k} \cdot \binom{n}{k} \cdot n! \cdot k! \cdot (2n - k)!$.

We get:

$$
\vert S_2 \vert = 
\left[2 \cdot \binom{2n}{n} \cdot (n!) \cdot (2n)!\right]
- \sum\limits_{0 \le k \le n}\left[\binom{n}{k}^3 \cdot n! \cdot k! \cdot (2n - k)!\right]
- \vert S_1 \vert
- 1
$$

$S_3$: Let $Z$ be the set of all $(3n)!$ permutations, then

$S_3 = Z - S_2 - S_1 - S_0$

As all of these sets are non-intersecting, we have:

$\Rightarrow \vert S_3 \vert = (3n)! - \vert S_2 \vert - \vert S_1 \vert - 1$

Finally, the answer is given by:

$$
\vert S_1 \vert + 2 \cdot \vert S_3 \vert + 3 \cdot \vert S_3 \vert
$$

***