---
layout: page
title: CF 1779
parent: Contest
math: true
---

## C

*Tags: Prefix sums, Greedy*

The given problem can be reduced to:

You are given an array $a_1, \ldots, a_n$. You can perform
this operation for some $i$:
- $a_i \leftarrow (-a_i)$

Find minimum number of operations to make every prefix sum
non-negative.

**Solution**

Let $p_i = a_1 + \ldots + a_i$.

Let $k$ be the smallest index such that $p_k \lt 0$. Then it is
clear that there should be a set of operations in range $[1, k]$ which
will create at least a difference $s$ such that $p_k + s \ge 0$.
- There has to be some $a_i \lt 0$ in this range ($1 \le i \le k$).
- If we pick some $a_i = -x$, then it is going to have effect $p_j \leftarrow p_j + x$
  for all $j \ge i$ (in other words it creates a difference $x$)
- We need a minimal set of indices $I$ such that $p_k + s \ge 0$ where $s = \sum\limits_{i \in I}{(-a_i)}$.
- We should keep picking the minimum $a_i$ until this condition is satisfied.
- Suppose optimal solution had a different set of indices $T$,
  $p_k + s' \ge 0$ where $s' = \sum\limits_{t \in T}{(-a_t)}$.
  - In greedy selection, to get sum at least $s$ we will not require more than $\vert T \vert$
    elements as choosing $\vert T \vert$ minimum values will definitely lead to a sum which is not worse.

To complete the solution, we do this for each such $k$ in increasing order.

## D

*Tags: Implementation*

We are given two integer arrays $a, b$ of length $n$.

The operation is:
- Choose some $l, r$ such that $1 \le l \le r \le n$.
- For some $x$, do $a_i \leftarrow \min(a_i, x)$ for all $l \le i \le r$

There is another constraint: some $x$ can only be used in at most
$c_x$ operations (which is also given).

Find if it is possible to get $a_i = b_i$ for all $i$ using these operations.

**Solution**

If for some $i$, $a_i \lt b_i$ then the required state is not possible.
From now on we will assume $a_i \ge b_i$.

For some $i$ where $a_i \gt b_i$ we need to perform an operation
with $x = b_i$ and the range $[l, r]$ should not cover any $j$ such that
$b_j \gt b_i$ because otherwise we make it impossible to make $b_j = a_j$
since we did operation $a_j \leftarrow \min(a_j, b_i)$.

Define $[l_i, r_i]$ to be the maximum size range (in which operation is allowed) for some $i$ where $a_i \gt b_i$.

Observe that for some $i, j$ where $b_i = b_j$ either the ranges
$[l_i, r_i]$ and $[l_j, r_j]$ are disjoint or they are the same.
This means that we can adjust $i$ and $j$ in same operation.

Thus we can do this for all distinct values of $b$:
- Let the value be $x$.
- Let $k$ be the number of disjoint ranges for all $i$ where $b_i = x$ and $a_i \gt b_i$.
- If $k \gt c_x$ it is impossible, otherwise it is possible for $x$.

The overall answer is possible if for all distinct values of $b$ it is possible.
a choice at each index to either take $a_i$ or $b_i$.

**Implementation**

We can keep a set of ranges $S$ and process distinct values of $b$ from
highest to lowest. This is because range size for lower values is
impacted by higher values but not vice versa.

Initially, $S$ only contains $[1, n]$. $S$ will always contain disjoint ranges.

To process some $x$
- Let $I$ be set of indices such that $b_i = x$ and $b_i \lt a_i$ for all $i \in I$.
- Let $k$ be number of distinct ranges in $S$ covering all indices in $I$.
  - Tip: we can associate a unique identifier to each range.
- Report impossible if $k \gt c_x$.
- For all $i \in I$, remove $i$ from its corresponding range in $S$. This operation
  can lead to new disjoint ranges.
  - Tip: the new ranges will again need unique identifiers.

Sample code for such a structure:
```cpp
struct segk {
  const int Inf = 1e9;
  set<T> s;
  int id = 0;
  segk (int l, int r) { /* initial range [l, r] */
    s.insert({l, r, id});
    s.insert({Inf, Inf, -1});
  }
  
  void remove (int x) { /* x should be there in some range */
    auto it = --s.lower_bound({x, Inf, Inf});
    int l, r, z; tie(l, r, z) = *it;
    s.erase(it);
    if (l < x) s.insert({l, x - 1, ++id});
    if (x < r) s.insert({x + 1, r, ++id});
  }
 
  int find (int x) { /* find id of range to which x belongs */
    auto it = --s.lower_bound({x, Inf, Inf});
    assert(it != s.end());
    return get<2>(*it);
  }
};
```

***